[Music]
six Pinkerton
among the more famous private detectives
recruited by the federal government was
Allan Pinkerton who served as an
intelligence organizer and coordinator
from April 1861 until the fall of the
following year his activities in and
around Washington were under the
direction of the Secretary of War and
Colonel Andrew Porter provost marshal
responsible for the Capitals security
while under martial law Pinkertons field
operations were in the service of
General George B McClellan during his
command of the Ohio forces and the Army
of the Potomac Pinkertons involvement
and intelligence activity in the Union
cause actually occurred before the great
Emancipator arrived at the White House
early in 1861 Samuel H Felton president
of the Philadelphia Wilmington and
Baltimore Railroad secured Pinkertons
services to investigate threats of
damage to the line quote by roughs and
secessionists of Maryland end quote
the detective dispatched undercover
agents to infiltrate gangs and secret
societies thought to be making the
intimidations and soon learned of a plot
to assassinate president-elect Lincoln
in league with members of the Baltimore
police force the conspirators planned to
kill the chief executive when he
travelled by open carriage from the
northern central railroad station to the
Washington Depot a half mile away
informing the president-elect entourage
of this scheme Pinkerton said about
devising an alternative travel plan for
the Lincoln Party after finally meeting
with the president-elect in Philadelphia
agreement was reached that a special
train would secretly carry Lincoln
through Baltimore the night before the
official Caravan was to arrive in that
city footnote by this time Lincoln had
also received word of the plot from
William Seward's son who had been given
the information by General Winfield
Scott C James D Horan the Pinkertons the
detective dynasty that made history
New York crown publishers 1967 page 56
and footnote thus it
looting the assassins the chief
executive made his way safely to
Washington for his part in these
activities Pinkerton not only had an
effective spy force but fixed the
Telegraph to render communication of the
ploy impossible detained to journalists
by force of arms from immediately
reporting the plan and assumed
responsibility for the security of the
tracks which the special train traveled
next in late April Pinkerton was
prevailed upon to provide a secure
courier service to Washington quote
several gentlemen of prominence in
Chicago intimate friends of President
Lincoln and men of influence and
intelligence in the state desired to
communicate with the president upon
questions connected with the existing
condition of affairs and applied to me
for the purpose of having letters and
dispatches conveyed directly to
Washington by the hands of a trusty
messenger end quote for this mission
Pinkerton selected Timothy Webster who
is destined to become one of the union's
most successful but martyred spies when
he arrived at the White House with the
communique s-- Lincoln thanked him for
safely conveying the messages and for
his role in apprehending a Confederate
spy along the way returned dispatches
were prepared by the president one of
which summoned Pinkerton to the Capitol
a few days later Pinkerton was in
Washington quote arriving at the Capitol
I found a condition of affairs at once
peculiar and embarrassing and the city
contained a strange admixture of
humanity both patriotic and dangerous
here were gathered the rulers of the
nation and those who were seeking its
destruction the streets were filled with
soldiers armed and eager for the fray
officers and orderlies were seen
galloping from place to place the
of armed men was heard on every side and
strains of martial music filled the air
here too lurked the secret enemy who was
conveying beyond the lines the coveted
information of every movement made or
contemplated
men who formerly occupied places of
dignity power and Trust were now
regarded as objects of suspicion whose
loyalty was impeached and whose actions
it was necessary to watch aristocratic
ladies who had previously opened the
doors of their luxurious residences to
those in high office and who had
hospitably entertained the dignitaries
of the land were now believed to be in
sympathy with the attempt to overthrow
the country and engaged in clandestine
correspondence with southern leaders the
criminal classes poured in from all
quarters and almost every avenue of
society was penetrated by these lawless
and unscrupulous hordes an adequate idea
can be formed of the transformation
which had been effected within a few
short weeks in this city of national
government and quote observant of the
conditions which might prompt the
enlistment of his intelligence services
Pinkerton shortly met with Lincoln and
some of the members of the cabinet who
informed him quote that the object in
sending for me was that the authorities
had for some time entertained the idea
of organizing a secret service
department of the government with the
view of ascertaining the social
political and patriotic status of the
numerous suspected persons in and around
the city
end quote no plans on this matter had
been drawn up Pinkerton was asked for
his ideas which he gave and then
departed with the understanding that
further communications on the subject
would be forthcoming not only did such
discussions fail to materialize but it
was quite apparent to Pinkerton quote
that in the confusion and excitement
which were necessarily incident to the
novel and perplexing conditions of
affairs than existing that anything
approaching to a systemized organization
or operation would be for a time
impossible
end quote the nation needed armed forces
too many competing demands for men money
and the attention of federal officials
for this task mitigated against plans
for a secret service
a few days after his meeting with
Lincoln Pinkerton unsuccessfully
attempted to obtain additional details
regarding the intelligence plan left his
address with the president's secretary
and returned to Philadelphia in the
meantime Major General George B
McClellan an old friend of Pinkertons
who had just been named commander of the
Ohio Volunteers wrote asking for a
secret meeting in Cincinnati Pinkerton
hastened to the rendezvous informed
McClellan of what had transpired in
Washington and of the conditions he
found there the general was also
interested in establishing a secret
service and wanted his friend to
organize and direct it an agreement was
struck quote our business was settled it
arranged that I should assume full
management and control of this new
branch of the service and that I should
at once enter upon the discharge of the
multifarious duties attending so
responsible a position the general then
informed me he would write to General
Winfield Scott for permission to
organize this department under his own
personal supervision and he also agreed
to submit the project to Governor
William Dennison of Ohio with a request
to that gentleman to solicit the
cooperation of the governors of Illinois
Indiana Michigan and Wisconsin in
sustaining the organization and quote
Pinkerton set up offices in Cincinnati
and brought a group of his detectives to
the city for the intelligence mission it
would appear that he utilized only his
own trained agents for this enterprise
quote the general informed me that he
would like observations made within the
rebel lines and I resolved to at once
send some scouts into the disaffected
region lying south of us for the purpose
of obtaining information concerning the
numbers equipment's movements and
intentions of the enemy as well as to
ascertain the general feeling of the
southern people in regard to the war I
fully realized the delicacy of this
business and the necessity of conducting
it with the greatest care caution and
secrecy
but good true reliable men could be
detailed for such service and
knowingness I made my selections
accordingly end quote
agents were dispatched singly and in
pairs over carefully selected and
differing routes among the first to
depart was Timothy Webster who traveled
to Louisville and Memphis with stops at
Bowling Green and Clarksville Webster
was also the first of Pinkertons
operatives to come into contact with the
Confederacy's counterintelligence Corps
or safety committees to other famous
Pinkerton agents were Pryce Lewis and
John Sculley quote in organizing and
controlling this secret service I
endeavoured to conceal my own individual
identity so far as my friends and the
public were concerned the new field of
usefulness into which I adventured was
designed to be a secret one in every
respect and for obvious reasons I was
induced to lay aside the name of Allan
Pinkerton a name so well known that it
had grown to be a sort of synonym for
detective I accordingly adopted the less
suggestive one EJ Allen a nom de Gor
which I retained during the entire
period of my connection with the war
this precautionary measure was first
proposed by the general himself and in
accenting to it I carried out his views
as well as my own this ruse to conceal
my identity was a successful one
my true name was known only to general
McClellan and those of my force who were
in my employ before the breaking out of
the rebellion and by them it was sacred
Lee kept end quote when McClellan was
given command of the Army of the Potomac
in November 1861 Pinkerton moved on to
Washington with him quote among the
first things the general did after being
assigned to the command of the troops
around that city was to organize a
Secret Service force under my management
and control I was to have such strength
of forces as I might require my
headquarters were for the time located
in Washington it was arranged that
whenever the army moved I was to go for
with the general so that I might always
be in close communication with him my
core was to be continually occupied in
procuring from all possible sources
information regarding the strengths
positions and movements of the enemy all
spies contrabands deserters refugees and
prisoners of war coming into our
alliance from the front were to be
carefully examined by me and their
statements taken in writing and quote it
was also at this time that Pinkerton
took on added responsibilities for
security within the capital city this
aspect of intelligence operations was
described by Pinkerton and a letter to
general McClellan shortly after the
Washington command was secured quote and
operating with my detective force I
shall endeavor to test all suspected
persons in various ways I shall seek
access to their houses clubs and places
of resort managing that among the
members of my force shall be extensible
representatives of every grade of
society from the highest to the most
menial some shall have the entree to the
gilded salon of the suspected
aristocratic traitors and be their
honored guests while others will act in
the capacity of valets or domestics of
various kinds and try the efficacy of
such relations with the household to
gain evidence other suspected ones will
be tracked by the shadow detective who
will follow their every footstep and
note their every action I also propose
to employ a division of my force for the
discovery of any secret traitorous
organization which may be in existence
and if any such society is discovered I
will have my operatives become members
of the same with a view to ascertaining
the means employed and transmitting
messages through the lines and also for
the purpose of learning if possible the
plans of the rebels all strangers
arriving in the city whose associations
or acts may lay them open to suspicion
will be subjected to a strict
surveillance end quote
in addition to these security and
surveillance activities Pinkertons
operatives cooperated with the loyal
league a group of southern blacks who
quote had banded themselves together to
further the cause of freedom to succor
the escaping slave and to furnish
information to loyal commanders of the
movements of the rebels as far as they
could be ascertained end quote
another intelligence source cultivated
by Pinkerton was the double agent as the
master detective himself concluded quote
in war as in a game of chess if you know
the moves of your adversary in advance
it is then an easy matter to shape your
own plans and make your moves
accordingly and of course always to your
own decided advantage so in this case I
concluded that if the information
intended for the rebels could first be
had by us after all they were welcome to
all the benefit they might derive from
them end quote
for all of his efforts doubts persist as
to the capabilities and accomplishments
of Pinkerton to the extent his
intelligence activities were successful
did they derive from careful planning
and evaluation or luck shortly after the
fall of Fort Sumter Pinkerton offered
the services of sixteen to eighteen of
his agents to serve the Union by the
time final arrangements were being made
for a spy force to assist McClellan's
Ohio volunteers ten agents have been put
into the field at the height of his
career in the Capitol it is uncertain as
to the number of personnel Pinkerton had
and his employ footnote Pinkerton was
sufficiently secretive about the number
and names of those in his employ that he
apparently was in constant dispute with
the Assistant Secretary of War who had
to approve his bills for service see her
inand Swigert page 120 and footnote for
the most part he hired and utilized his
own detectives quote he held the not
implausible notion that a good private
detective can automatically become an
expert secret agent in time of war
and no we're either in the performance
of his duties or in subsequent records
dictated by him is there to be
discovered any conception of the
essentially military character of the
work he sought to direct end quote quote
the reasons for Pinkertons deficiency
and correctly evaluating the military
information he received or his Blind
hero worship of McClellan the
investigative methods he had introduced
in the field that had made his agency so
remarkable in civilian life and his
intense abolitionist fervor in Chicago
when he was on a case Pinkertons method
was to assemble an infinite number of
small details which when put together
gave a clue to the mystery Pinkertons
operatives traditionally sent in reports
every day no matter how difficult it was
to do so in Chicago these reports were
filed in a systematic fashion this very
system which Pinkerton introduced on the
battlefields defeated him it failed
because the man making the final report
was an amateur at war then there was
Pinkertons anti-slavery attitude for
years he had been helping slaves who
came to him with the most touching
stories in the field Pinkerton and his
sympathy was uncritical of the excited
uneducated slaves who stood before him
in his tent twisting a ragged hat
shuffling their feet in the excitement
of knowing that at last they were
incapable of giving realistic
information about what was happening on
a grand scale behind Confederate lines
it is evident that Pinkerton believed
everything they told him
end quote ultimately Pinkertons in
abilities as an interpreter of
intelligence information for military
purposes contributed to his downfall as
head of the Washington spike or early in
1862 Lincoln set February 22nd for the
launching of a general Union offensive
McClellan who had already exhibited a
tendency to hesitate and engaging the
enemy did not start operations in the
offensive until March when he began
moving on Richmond in the Peninsula
Campaign advancing over the territory
between the James and New York rivers he
was given an estimate of enemy
strength of 200,000 men in fact the
Confederate forces numbered 86,000 to
McClellan's 100,000 nevertheless the
effect of this inflated estimate was
sufficient to make the Union commander
even more hesitant to engage the enemy
than he had been in the past after a
series of skirmishes troops under
General Robert Healy and General Thomas
J Stonewall Jackson launched a
counter-attack on the McClellan forces
in the seven days battles resulting in a
retreat of the larger Union Army to the
James River and a check on the advance
toward Richmond two months later in
September McClellan surprised Lee at
Antietam but failing to use his reserves
fought the rebels to a bloody draw
angered at Lee's escape by McClellan's
procrastination and alarmed by a daring
cavalry raid by General James EB jeb
stuart around the Union forces and into
Pennsylvania
Lincoln finally replaced McClellan as
commander of the Army of the Potomac on
November 7th 1862 thereupon Pinkerton
resigned his position as head of the
Secret Service quote the detective as it
was to turn out did not really do much
more than effect a change of front for
he was active on behalf of the
government as long as the states were in
conflict there were innumerable damage
claims being pressed in Washington the
deeper into the south the Union armies
penetrated the more they multiplied and
these the Pinkerton agents investigated
with a high average of success in
controlling the schemes of Impostors and
swindlers for the particular purpose of
looking after cotton claims in the
spring of 64 Allan Pinkerton was
transferred to the Department of the
Mississippi general can be commanding
and now his other son Robert was deemed
mature enough to join his brother in the
Secret Service meanwhile the military
espionage department which Allen had
initiated continued to expand operating
under the fairly successful direction of
various officers in the east the most
noteworthy being Colonel after
were Brigadier General Lafayette C Baker
an inventive man one of the few American
spy masters in any war who seems to
compare with the brilliant if thoroughly
unscrupulous practitioners of Europe in
the West Grenville M dodge who also
attained a generals rank capably
controlled a hundred spies but he was to
become far more celebrated subsequently
as the indomitable builder of the Union
Pacific Railroad
[Music]
this is our hidden history